---
layout: post
title: Sizing thread pools
---

### Sizing thread pools

Whenever we are writing multi-threaded applications, we need to decide how many threads are required for which task. 
This is a factor of hardaware the application will run on and it can not be a fixed number. Even tough this needs to be benchamarked and fine tuned on every machine our application will run on but fortunately with a bit of understanding of the subject we can calculate a number which will give us a good estimate. To do this we need to understand the nature of our tasks. Broadly we can devide the tasks into two categories : CPU intensive and IO intensive. For CPU intensive tasks we can create thread pools of size = number of cpus. This in most cases will give the best performance. For IO intensive tasks we can use a bigger number. This concept has been explained very 
well in the book 'Concurrency in Practice'. It says we can use following formula to calculate number of threads needed : 

```javascript
No. of threads = No of CPUs * Desired CPU utilization (1 + Time spent on IO/Time spent on computation)
```

When I read this in the book, I was not really able to appreciate how more threads can help. I tried few exapmles examples and analyzed 
with Visual VM to understand this. I will try to demonstrate this in this blog. 

1. Machine has 4 cores. 
2. We need to run 8 tasks, each takes 10 second.
3. If we run 4 tasks in parallel, all the tasks will finish in 20 second. This is the best performance we can expect. 
   In such a scenario, it is  a good idea to size the thread pool for such a task to the number of cores.
4. Imagine each of these tasks spend 5 seconds out of 10 seconds doing IO (disk or network). 
5. This means the cores are idle for 5 seconds while IO is happening. i.e 40 seconds in total.
6. During these idle 40 seconds, the cores can be alloted to work on different threads.
7. This means we can increase the the thread pool size to 8. 
8. Now this entire operation will complete in 15 seconds.

----
****
